If you missed the latest battle over of the Internet, don’t be surprised. The federal government has grown increasingly sneaky as it attempts to take control.

For most of the Obama administration, the Federal Communications Commission has attempted to ram through controversial policies known collectively as “net neutrality” under which people who use a lot of bandwidth could not be charged more than those who use a little, and big content companies like Netflix and YouTube would get a government-guaranteed free ride.

The idea has appeal to the so-called millennials, who seem to believe anything that’s on the Internet should be free – or mostly free – and that they shouldn’t have to pay more for using more bandwidth. As an economic proposition this will lead to a slowdown in technological innovations; companies that maintain the essential infrastructure will not have market-based incentives to make improvements.

Congress has said "no" to net neutrality. So have the federal courts, telling the FCC it does not have the authority to impose net neutrality on Internet service providers. Now the American people are saying “no,” too – but you probably haven’t heard about that because, in the battle between the pressure groups, the “pro” side is whining while the “con” side is winning.

The FCC recently proposed giving itself the authority to regulate the Internet as a public utility, much like electric power. As such, the agency argues it would then be able to impose net neutrality on the entire system by basically bringing it in through the back door in the dead of night when no one was looking. Before taking any action, however, the agency was required to put the regulations allowing it to do this out there for the public to review and comment on. It’s important to note that every comment has to be considered as part of the process of deciding whether – and how – to move forward.

Liberal groups organized in support of the idea. Calling their activities the “Battle for the Net,” they claimed they managed to generate 777,364 public comments to the FCC in favor of Net regulation. This sounds like a pretty substantial number and was the focus of many of the news commentaries on the issue.

What was missed, apparently, is that the folks behind StopInternetRegulation.org, who oppose treating the Internet like a public utility, drove 808,363 public comments on the same proposal in just three weeks – meaning, on a head-to-head basis, the “no” side has more support.

Americans, it appears, like the Internet just the way it is. Most of the news reports, however, seemed to miss this, which provoked the ire of those behind the “no” to regulation campaign.

"Everyone needs to get this story right,” said Phil Kerpen, president of the group American Commitment, which set up the StopInternetRegulation.org website. “[O]n our side are the vast majority of the American people who love the Internet the way it is – unregulated, supported by private investment in a free economy, competitive, and highly innovative,” he said in a release. “On the other side are radical left activists, who are seeking political control over the Internet.”

Kerpen continued:

The leftist proponents of regulation keep hiding their true agenda. They pretend to be defenders of the Internet we all know and love, but what they are actually advocating are massive new monopoly-style 'public utility' regulations on the Internet – regulations that have been opposed for decades by a bipartisan consensus which included President Bill Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, Democratic FCC Chairman Bill Kennard, and the bipartisan majorities in Congress who passed the 1996 Telecom Act specifically to move away from monopoly regulation and into the competitive world we live in today.

There are threats to the continued freedom of the Internet coming from all sides. Some people are lobbying to tax Internet access. Others want it regulated as a public utility, as explained above. Still more want to see the U.S. government give up its role supervising the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers – allowing the U.S.-chartered ICANN to become a wholly private entity, operating on its own authority, which just might allow information-censoring countries such as China, Russia and Iran to carry just as much or (in combination) more weight than the United States on Internet-governance issues.

Congress has said "no" to more regulation of the Internet. So have the federal courts. Now the American people have taken the same position. It’s time for the FCC to listen and to drop this whole, ridiculous idea.
